Technical specs for the epic 34 (#78)
ghga-de/milestones-docs: 34-chinese-pangolin/technical_specification.md

### Included/Required:

This Epic includes:

- The creation of a new service, the **Purge Controller Service (PCS)**, which provides a RESTfull HTTP DELETE enpoint /files/{file_id}.
- Upon receiving the deletion request and validation of the access token it publishes an event
- The following services subscribe to the new event and do the following after consuming:
    - IFRS: Deletes the file from permanent storage (IRS would be better, but IRS does not have the connection between outward-facing file_id and S3 file name)
    - IFRS: Send API Call to EKSS to delete the secret
    - IFRS: Delete file from outbox
    - IFRS: Delete file entry from its database
    - DCS: Delete file entry from its database
    - Both services: Publish confirmation event afterwards
- The EKSS provides a new RESTful HTTP DELETE endpoint /sercets/{secret_id} that deletes the corresponding secret from vault.

These parts of the epic are described in detail below.

### Optional: Caching Strategy for DCS/Outbox

- Add a "last_accessed" field for each entry in the DCS files database
- Each time a file is sucessfully accessed via a download request, update its "last_accessed" field

> - Provide a script that scans the "last_accessed" field of all files currently present in the Outbox. If the timedelta since the last access is above a certain (to be determined) threshold, delete the respective file from the Outbox.

Reviewer: This script should probably be part of the download controller service. Thus the download controller service will receive write access to the outbox. In that case, we can also let the DCS and not the IFRS do the deletion of the file in the outbox upon request. What do you think?

### Not included:

Any functionality concerning caching/cleanup of the upload path.

- Delete file entries from UCS Database
- Delete files from Inbox
- Delete files from Staging

## API Definitions:

### RESTful/Synchronous:

The PCS should have a single endpoint that can be accessed to delete files, conforming to the GDPR's right to be forgotten.

- PCS: DELETE /files/{file_id}
    - auth header: internal access token
    - Response: 204 'No Content'
    - If the validation of the auth header fails: 403 'Forbidden'

This will internally send out a deletion event (See below.)

The EKSS will get a corresponding endpoint to delete a file secret.

- EKSS: DELETE /secrets/{secret_id}:
    - no header, no body

>     - Response: 204 'No Content'

Reviewer: Maybe better to return 202 since the actual deletion is not yet finished when returning the response.

```suggestion
    - Response: 202 'Accepted'
```

    - If the secret could not be found, send 404 with a "secretNotFoundError"

### Payload Schemas for Events:

A deletion event schema will be defined in the ghga-event-schemas repository.
The event schema will detail contain:

>     - file_id (outward-facing id of that file)

Reviewer: Maybe also the user id for later auditing.

Author: Is the user_id part of the authentication token or how does the PCS get this ID?

Added to Refactoring Notes.

The exact field names and constraints will be provided in the ghga-event-schemas repository, which is considered the source of truth.

This event will be used to announce a file deletion by the PCS.

A deletion event confimation schema will be defined in the ghga-event-schemas repository.
The event schema will contain:
    - file_id (outward-facing id of that file)
The exact field names and constraints will be provided in the ghga-event-schemas repository, which is considered the source of truth.

> This event will announce the deletion of a file from the S3 storage buckets that fall within the responsibility of the service emitting the event and the removal of all corresponding entries in the service database.

Reviewer: Do we want that all services that are carrying out the deletion answer with an event that is designed from the perspective of the PCS, or shouldn't we rather make the PCS understand events designed from the perspective of the other services? Maybe remains to be discussed.

Author: At the moment, we have no subscriber for these events (The PCS at the moment will not subscribe to them). These events are designed from the perspective of the services, but they currently carry the same information, regardless if the come from the DCS or IFRS.

Added to the refactoring Doc.

# File Deletion and Outbox Cache Strategy (Chinese Pangolin)
**Epic Type:** Implementation Epic

## Scope
### Outline:

This Epic adds a new service, which provides a deletion endpoint for files.
Calling this enpoint internally publishes an event.

> All services subscribing to this event will then delete this file from their databases and from S3 buckets they have write access to.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All services subscribing to this event will then delete the corresponding file and information pertaining to it from their databases and from the S3 buckets they have write access to.
```

### Included/Required:

This Epic includes:

- The creation of a new service, the **Purge Controller Service (PCS)**, which provides a RESTfull HTTP DELETE enpoint /files/{file_id}.

> - Upon receiving and validating the deletion request, it publishes an event

Reviewer 2: What does validation mean in this context, checking the access token?
This should be rephrased to be a bit more specific

- The following services subscribe to the new event and do the following after consuming:
    - IFRS: Deletes the file from permanent storage (IRS would be better, but IRS does not have the connection between outward-facing file_id and S3 file name)
    - IFRS: Send API Call to EKSS to delete the secret
    - IFRS: Delete file from outbox
    - IFRS: Delete file entry from its database
    - DCS: Delete file entry from its database
    - Both services: Publish confirmation event afterwards
- The EKSS provides a new RESTful HTTP DELETE endpoint /sercets/{secret_id} that deletes the corresponding secret from vault.

These parts of the epic are described in detail below.

### Optional: Caching Strategy for DCS/Outbox

- Add a "last_accessed" field for each entry in the DCS files database

> - Each time, this file is sucessfully accessed via a download request, update the "last_accessed" field for this files entry

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Each time a file is sucessfully accessed via a download request, update its "last_accessed" field
```

> - Provide Script that looks through all files currently in the Outbox. If their "last_accessed" time is longer ago then a certain threshold, delete that file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Provide a script that scans the "last_accessed" field of all files currently present in the Outbox. If the timedelta since the last access is above a certain (to be determined) threshold, delete the respective file from the Outbox.
```
Phrasing with regard to file deletion is ambiguous here, even if intent is clear

### Not included:

Any functionality concerning caching/cleanup of the upload path.

- Delete file entries from UCS Database
- Delete files from Inbox
- Delete files from Staging

## API Definitions:

### RESTful/Synchronous:

> The PCS should have a single endpoint that can be accessed to delete files, conforming to the GDPRs right to be forgotten.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The PCS should have a single endpoint that can be accessed to delete files, conforming to the GDPR's right to be forgotten.
```

- PCS: DELETE /files/{file_id}
    - auth header: internal access token
    - Response: 204 'No Content'
    - If the validation of the auth header fails: 403 'Forbidden'

This will internally send out a deletion event (See below.)

The EKSS will get a corresponding endpoint to delete a file secret.

- EKSS: DELETE /secrets/{secret_id}:

>     - no header, no body

Reviewer 2: This means this call is unauthenticated and guarded by only being available internally?
Probably missed that part of the discussion, so what's the rationale here?

Author: That's pretty much the rational right now. We might change it later.

    - Response: 204 'No Content'
    - If the secret could not be found, send 404 with a "secretNotFoundError"

### Payload Schemas for Events:

A deletion event schema will be defined in the ghga-event-schemas repository.

> The event schema will detail contain:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The event schema will contain:
```

    - file_id (outward-facing id of that file)
The exact field names and constraints will be provided in the ghga-event-schemas repository, which is considered the source of truth.

This event will be used to announce a file deletion by the PCS.

A deletion event confimation schema will be defined in the ghga-event-schemas repository.

> The event schema will detail contain:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The event schema will contain:
```

    - file_id (outward-facing id of that file)
The exact field names and constraints will be provided in the ghga-event-schemas repository, which is considered the source of truth.

> This event will be used to announce, that a file and its database entry has been deleted from the S3 storage
> and the database controlled by the service that sent the event.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This event will announce the deletion of a file from the S3 storage buckets that fall within the responsibility of the service emitting the event and the removal of all corresponding entries in the service database.
```
